Anno Accademico 2023/2024
Laurea magistrale in INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS / RELAZIONI INTERNAZIONALI
Curriculum: INTERNATIONAL TRADE
Per maggiori informazioni vai su http://www.unipa.it/struttura.html?id=1482
---------
Classe di Laurea magistrale in Relazioni internazionali (LM-52)
Durata 2 anni
Sede PALERMO
Accesso libero
Dipartimento di Scienze Politiche e delle Relazioni Internazionali
Codice corso 2139
---------
Insegnamenti primo anno
Codice materia	Nome materia	Docente	CFU	Periodo	SSD	Obiettivi Formativi
15905	INTERNATIONAL TRADE LAW (in inglese)	CASABONA	12	1° semestre	IUS/02	knowledge of the national and international set of rules that govern the  international contract in general knowledge of the national and international set of rules that govern specific  international contracts, such as -for example - int. transportation contract; int.  agency contract; inter. contract of sale, distributorship agreement.
20652	CONTEMPORARY WORLD HISTORY (in inglese)	PATTI	6	1° semestre	M-STO/04	The course aims to provide the student with advanced knowledge and  understanding of the Contemporary History critical perspectives on some of the  historical literature on migration in a global perspective, focusing on the history  of mobility and migrations in postwar Europe, and on the contribution of these  phenomena in shaping contemporary Europe after 1945. The course will focus  on the issues of migration processes in postwar Europe in connection with  decolonisation, and with the creation of the European Community. The readings  emphasize major themes and questions in migration history, including networks  and diaspora; labor migration; refugees; ethnicity, race, gender, and class;  empire; and questions of border surveillance. The course will analyse the experiences of migrants, and it will examine "how  [...] migrations and mobility impacted the way national communities, as well as  the European one, have been defining themselves and their real and imaginary  boundaries" Students will reflect on the way contemporary global history relates to migration  history; decolonization history; post-colonialism and, more generally, the critique  of Eurocentrism.  Attention will be paid to the complex nexus between processes and the  international context, to the topic of the postwar international regime, in a world,  and in particular in an European continent, reconfigured by the end of WWII, the  cold war and decolonization.
20648	GLOBALIZATION AND EUROPEAN ECONOMIC HISTORY (in inglese)	ASSO	12	2° semestre	SECS-P/04	The main objectives of this course regard the study of basic principles, theories,  events in the history of monetary and real integration with specific attention to  the global economy. The course will also provide the acquisition of specific  knowledge about the causes and effects of the contemporary economic growth,      development and crisis in a long term and comparative perspective. Specific attention will be devoted to the new institutional economics and to the  analysis of inequalities in a global perspective. Part of the course is devoted to  European issues in historical and contemporary perspective. Moreover the costs  and benefits of financial globalization and financial crisis will be the object of  specific lectures.
20650	GLOBAL POLITICS AND INTERNATIONAL SECURITY (in inglese)	MONTELEONE	12	2° semestre		The module analyses actors, processes, and institutions in the contemporary global political system that have potential  effects on policy-setting contexts and that affect policy-making and the effectiveness, stability, and predictability of political  institutions at the national, regional, international, and global levels. It allows students to understand the relevance – and  assess the soundness - of scenarios and country reports used in public policy decision-making. The course will enable  students to understand more complex concepts of Political Science and International Relations and advanced methods to  analyze phenomena of contemporary global politics. In its second module, the course focuses on international security, investigating contemporary world security issues, actors,  and processes. Students will learn to approach international security from theoretical, analytical and policy-oriented  perspectives. The module will first provide students with contending approaches to international security and with the main  changes in the field over time. Knowledge on the causes of interstate and intrastate conflicts and on the main contemporary  challenges to international security (proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, civil wars, global terrorism, transnational  organized crime, climate change, human trafficking) is offered. Finally, security actors, conflict management processes and a  contemporary conflict scenario will be in-depth analyzed .
	INTERNATIONAL SECURITY (in inglese)	ROSSI	6		SPS/04
	GLOBAL POLITICS (in inglese)	MONTELEONE	6		SPS/04
22629	AFRICAN HISTORY AND INSTITUTIONS (in inglese)	PUDDU	6	2° semestre	SPS/13	The programme is designed to offer an overview of Africa's history in the  nineteenth and twentieth century. The course will focus on some key aspects of  the political and economic history of the continent, with particular reference to  the entanglement between state building, economic accumulation and  international trade. Students will be also guided into some case studies aimed at exploring two main  topics: the relationship between Western governments, business groups, and  African actors in the post-colonial era; the politics of conflict, state-making and  state resistance in the borderlands of the Horn of Africa of the twentieth century;  development aid and democratization in Africa.
	Attiv. form. a scelta dello studente (consigliate)		12		

Insegnamenti secondo anno
Codice materia	Nome materia	Docente	CFU	Periodo	SSD	Obiettivi Formativi
18285	BUSINESS ENGLISH (in inglese)		6	1° semestre	L-LIN/12	Students will broaden vocabulary and increase the breadth of their knowledge of  Business English. Business idioms will add colour to their language and enable  them to express a complicated idea in few words, while etymology will help  cement an expansive business vocabulary in their memory. Their understanding  of euphemisms will enable them to express bad news - in business - in a polite  way, while also making them aware that it can also be used to deceive.
20651	COMPETION LAW & INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS (in inglese)	GARILLI	12	1° semestre		The course aims to provide advanced knowledge in the field of competition law. Furthermore, lessons provide students with the ability to select instruments and methods in order to update and constantly improve learning skills, in particular by analysing case law and law materials as well as referring to specialized literature in the legal field The course aims to provide advanced knowledge in the field of intellectual property law. Furthermore, lessons provide students with the ability to select instruments and methods in order to update and constantly improve learning skills, in particular by analysing case law and law materials as well as referring to specialized literature in the legal field
	COMPETITION LAW (in inglese)	GARILLI	6		IUS/04
	INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS (in inglese)	GARILLI	6		IUS/04
20676	INTERNSHIP (in inglese)		12	1° semestre	
21342	BUSINESS STRATEGY (in inglese)	COSENZ	6	1° semestre	SECS-P/07	Students are able to design and implement business strategies, as well as  evaluating the emerging results in different business contexts. Since the 99% of  businesses is charachterized by a small-medium size, the course focuses on the  organizational attributes, conditions and variables of these specific  organizations. Skills are developed in designing shared viable strategies, and  mapping organizational processes affecting organizational performance.  Students also learn to use innovative strategy design approaches (e.g.,  Business Modelling) for supporting business decision-making processes to  identify areas for results improvement, and set proper goals/objectives, as well      as performance indicators to foster viable strategies.
20658	FINAL THESIS (in inglese)		18	2° semestre	
	Gruppo di attiv. form. opzionali		6		

Gruppo di attiv. form. opzionali
Codice materia	Nome materia	Docente	CFU	Periodo	SSD	Obiettivi Formativi
17108	EUROPEAN INTERNATIONAL TAX LAW (in inglese)	PARLATO	6	1° semestre	IUS/12	GOALS The course aims to develop the skills necessary to understand the principles of  EU and International tax law which are essentials for an education aimed at  European and International arenas in order to deliver the appropriate skills for  the business world and perspective occupation or for further academic studies  as well.
20649	CORPORATE TAX AND CUSTOMS REGIMES (in inglese)	PERRONE	6	1° semestre	IUS/12	Educational objective is to achieve an adequate degree of knowledge of income  corporate taxation, customs law and customs regimes, in order to be able to  enter the working context of companies operating in international markets

Attiv. form. a scelta dello studente (consigliate)
Codice materia	Nome materia	Docente	CFU	Periodo	SSD	Obiettivi Formativi
21252	INTERNATIONAL TRANSPORT LAW AND LOGISTICS	RIGAZIO	12	1° semestre	IUS/01	Knowledge of the main systems of transport law from the international legal  point of view, with particular focus on the systems by sea, land, air, road and  intermodal. Understanding of the international legal framework in relation to the  transport system and critical capacity in the analysis of it. Use of appropriate  technical legal English terminology to describe and solve also practical cases.

