Anno Accademico 2023/2024
Laurea magistrale in INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS / RELAZIONI INTERNAZIONALI
Curriculum: INTERNATIONAL STUDIES
Per maggiori informazioni vai su http://www.unipa.it/struttura.html?id=1482
---------
Classe di Laurea magistrale in Relazioni internazionali (LM-52)
Durata 2 anni
Sede PALERMO
Accesso libero
Dipartimento di Scienze Politiche e delle Relazioni Internazionali
Codice corso 2139
---------
Insegnamenti primo anno
Codice materia	Nome materia	Docente	CFU	Periodo	SSD	Obiettivi Formativi
19149	INTERNATIONAL LAW (in inglese)		6	1° semestre	IUS/13	/
20652	CONTEMPORARY WORLD HISTORY (in inglese)	PATTI	6	1° semestre	M-STO/04	The course aims to provide the student with advanced knowledge and  understanding of the Contemporary History critical perspectives on some of the  historical literature on migration in a global perspective, focusing on the history  of mobility and migrations in postwar Europe, and on the contribution of these  phenomena in shaping contemporary Europe after 1945. The course will focus  on the issues of migration processes in postwar Europe in connection with  decolonisation, and with the creation of the European Community. The readings  emphasize major themes and questions in migration history, including networks  and diaspora; labor migration; refugees; ethnicity, race, gender, and class;  empire; and questions of border surveillance. The course will analyse the experiences of migrants, and it will examine "how  [...] migrations and mobility impacted the way national communities, as well as  the European one, have been defining themselves and their real and imaginary  boundaries" Students will reflect on the way contemporary global history relates to migration  history; decolonization history; post-colonialism and, more generally, the critique  of Eurocentrism.  Attention will be paid to the complex nexus between processes and the  international context, to the topic of the postwar international regime, in a world,  and in particular in an European continent, reconfigured by the end of WWII, the  cold war and decolonization.
22653	AFRO-ASIATIC LEGAL SYSTEMS (in inglese)	MANCUSO	12	1° semestre	IUS/21	- knowledge of the fundamental features and characteristics of non-Western  jurisdictions, with particular reference to afro-asiatic countries;
20648	GLOBALIZATION AND EUROPEAN ECONOMIC HISTORY (in inglese)	ASSO	12	2° semestre	SECS-P/04	The main objectives of this course regard the study of basic principles, theories,  events in the history of monetary and real integration with specific attention to  the global economy. The course will also provide the acquisition of specific  knowledge about the causes and effects of the contemporary economic growth,      development and crisis in a long term and comparative perspective. Specific attention will be devoted to the new institutional economics and to the  analysis of inequalities in a global perspective. Part of the course is devoted to  European issues in historical and contemporary perspective. Moreover the costs  and benefits of financial globalization and financial crisis will be the object of  specific lectures.
20650	GLOBAL POLITICS AND INTERNATIONAL SECURITY (in inglese)	MONTELEONE	15	2° semestre		The module focuses on the analysis of actors, processes, and institutions in the contemporary global political system that  have potential effects on policy-setting contexts and that affect policy-making and the effectiveness, stability, and  predictability of political institutions at the national, regional, international, and global levels. It allows students to understand  the relevance – and assess the soundness - of tools used in public policy decision-making, including foreign policy. The  course will allow students to understand more complex concepts of Political Science and International Relations and  advanced methods to analyze phenomena of contemporary global politics, with a specific focus on global policies and  diplomacy. In its second module, the course focuses on international security, investigating contemporary world security issues, actors,  and processes. Students will learn to approach international security from theoretical, analytical and policy-oriented  perspectives. The module will first provide students with contending approaches to international security and with the main  changes in the field over time. Knowledge on the causes of interstate and intrastate conflicts and on the main contemporary  challenges to international security (proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, civil wars, global terrorism, transnational  organized crime, climate change, human trafficking) is offered. Finally, security actors, conflict management processes and a  contemporary conflict scenario will be in-depth analyzed .
	GLOBAL POLITICS (in inglese)	MONTELEONE	9		SPS/04
	INTERNATIONAL SECURITY (in inglese)	ROSSI	6		SPS/04
22629	AFRICAN HISTORY AND INSTITUTIONS (in inglese)	PUDDU	6	2° semestre	SPS/13	The programme is designed to offer an overview of Africa's history in the  nineteenth and twentieth century. The course will focus on some key aspects of  the political and economic history of the continent, with particular reference to  the entanglement between state building, economic accumulation and  international trade. Students will be also guided into some case studies aimed at exploring two main  topics: the relationship between Western governments, business groups, and  African actors in the post-colonial era; the politics of conflict, state-making and  state resistance in the borderlands of the Horn of Africa of the twentieth century;  development aid and democratization in Africa.

Insegnamenti secondo anno
Codice materia	Nome materia	Docente	CFU	Periodo	SSD	Obiettivi Formativi
10546	WORKSHOP (in inglese)		3	1° semestre	
19340	INTERNATIONAL AND TRANSNATIONAL CRIMINAL JUSTICE (in inglese)	PARISI	12	1° semestre	IUS/17	Starting from a multifactorial approach, students will be provided with theoretical  and practical skills to identify best practices and new strategies in fighting      international and transnational crimes.
20645	GLOBAL SUPRANATIONAL CHALLENGES AND PUBLIC REGULATION (in inglese)	MOCAVINI	6	1° semestre	IUS/09	The course aims to provide the fundamental bases of legal globalization in the  public law sphere and is divided in two parts. The first one includes the analysis  of the development of legal globalization and its impacts on the traditional  political model of Nation-State. The development of the ‘global constitutionalism’  and the spread of democratic institutions around the world are examined. The  principles and procedures of global administrative law and the emergence of  global regulatory organizations are described. The second part focuses on some  areas of global regulation, like natural resources, cultural heritage, financial  markets, internet and personal data. In the second part, the hurdles to legal      globalization are taking into account (for instance, the normative restrictions on  international trade and foreign direct investments), in order to show the  complexity of global legal order.
20658	FINAL THESIS (in inglese)		18	2° semestre	
	Gruppo di attiv. form. opzionali		12		
	Attiv. form. a scelta dello studente		12		

Gruppo di attiv. form. opzionali
Codice materia	Nome materia	Docente	CFU	Periodo	SSD	Obiettivi Formativi
20673	SPANISH LANGUAGE (in inglese)		12	1° semestre	L-LIN/07	The course has two independent, but closely related, objectives: 1) the acquisition of the linguistic, communicative, pragmatic, discursive and intercultural skills of A2 / B1 level; 2) the introduction to the Translation between similar languages (Spanish-Italian and Italian-Spanish) of short non-literary texts.
20674	GERMAN LANGUAGE (in inglese)		12	1° semestre	L-LIN/14

