Anno Accademico 2023/2024
Laurea magistrale in SCIENZE DELLE AMMINISTRAZIONI E DELLE ORGANIZZAZIONI COMPLESSE
Curriculum: PUBLIC MANAGEMENT
Per maggiori informazioni vai su http://www.unipa.it/struttura.html?id=771
---------
Classe di Laurea magistrale in Scienze delle pubbliche amministrazioni (LM-63)
Durata 2 anni
Sede PALERMO
Accesso libero
Dipartimento di Scienze Politiche e delle Relazioni Internazionali
Codice corso 2163
---------
Insegnamenti primo anno
Codice materia	Nome materia	Docente	CFU	Periodo	SSD	Obiettivi Formativi
15905	INTERNATIONAL TRADE LAW (in inglese)	CASABONA	6	1° semestre	IUS/02	knowledge of the national and international set of rules that govern the  international contract in general knowledge of the national and international set of rules that govern specific  international contracts, such as -for example - int. transportation contract; int.  agency contract; inter. contract of sale, distributorship agreement.
19378	COMPETITION LAW (in inglese)	GARILLI	6	1° semestre	IUS/04	The course aims to provide advanced knowledge in the field of EU competition law. Furthermore, lessons provide students with the ability to select instruments and methods in order to update and constantly improve learning skills, in particular by analysing case law and law materials as well as referring to specialized literature in the legal field.
21176	TRANSNATIONAL CRIMINAL JUSTICE (in inglese)	PARISI	6	1° semestre	IUS/17	Starting from a multifactorial approach, students will be provided with theoretical  and practical skills to identify best practices and  balanced strategies in fighting  transnational crimes.
18691	ECONOMICS OF CULTURAL MARKETS (in inglese)	FIORITO	6	2° semestre	SECS-P/01	- Knowledge and understanding: Demonstrate knowledge and understanding of  the functioning of actual cultural markets. - Applying knowledge and understanding: Interpret and apply knowledge and  understanding to actual case studies in the field of cultural markets. - Making judgements: Analyze economic issues and arguments, using relevant  economic concepts, theories and information, and communicate conclusions in  a clear, reasoned manner. - Communication: a facility for self-expression, not only in writing but also in  using additional aids, such as statistics and diagrams, where appropriate - Learning skills: Critically evaluate economic information, arguments, proposals  and policies, taking into consideration relevant information and economic  principles and distinguishing facts from hypothetical statements and value  judgements.
21165	DYNAMIC PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT FOR PUBLIC SECTOR ORGANIZATIONS (in inglese)	BIANCHI	8	2° semestre	INF/01	Il programma formativo approfondisce quanto appreso durante il corso di  "Dynamic Performance Management" applicando la metodologia DPM a casi di  studio di aziende pubbliche con particolare riferimento all'outcome-based  performance management & governance e al behavioral performance  management.
21175	DYNAMIC PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT (in inglese)	BIANCHI	10	2° semestre	SECS-P/07	Dynamic Performance Management (DPM) is a conceptual framework adopting  a feedback view to frame dynamic complexity and deal with it, so to enhance  policy design and implementation, leading to sustainable outcomes.   Through facilitated modeling, DPM fosters performance dialogue,  communication and learning in both organizational and inter-organizational  settings (e.g.: city neighborhoods). This enables a major shift from performance  measurement to performance management, which enhances the use of  performance information by the involved stakeholders.   By adopting a causal and outcome-oriented view of performance, DPM supports  stakeholders to broaden the investigated system boundaries for policy analysis.  This also enhances trade-off analysis in both time (about the effects of policies  in the short vs. long term) and space (about the effects of policies on a  subsystem vs. another subsystem).  Through DPM, performance drivers and related strategic resources are  modeled, to enable selective and prompt detection of “weak signals” of change,  affecting performance outputs and outcomes in the long run. This also supports  policy makers to design and implement policies to counteract the causes behind  the detected adverse “weak signals”, so to foster sustainable performance.   DPM adopts a balanced view of performance measures, not only embodying the  financial, but also the competitive and social dimension of the end-results.  DPM challenges traditional performance analysis, based on a static, sectoral,  and financial oriented view. It also fosters an interdisciplinary view of  management. Not only the linkages between different business functions (e.g.:  organization, strategy, human resource, finance, customer relationships) are  captured by DPM, but also the perspectives provided by other disciplines (e.g.:  psychology, sociology, law, and political science) are embodied in framing  performance.    Based on case-study analysis, by attending this course students will learn how  to develop conceptual and insight computer simulation models rooted on a DPM  approach.     The course starts with six sessions aimed at introducing DPM in the broad  performance management domain. To this end, students are asked to analyze a  set of papers and discuss them over the sessions through different slots of  debating points. This helps them to frame main evolution patterns that the  performance management discipline and practice have been portraying in the  last six decades. They will perceive how the changing and growing level of  dynamic complexity of the contexts where (public, private, profit, non-profit)  organizations operate has been a primary factor requiring major innovations in  performance management systems design, leading to corresponding shifts of  focus in the discipline. Students will also experience how each evolutionary  stage in the field has embodied the logics of the prior stages. They will also  discover how major issues which are today considered as new trends in  performance management systems design were addressed by researchers  since the ‘70s as potential factors of failure, or “pseudo” control. They will reflect  on how, since then, major risks of performance management systems failure  were reported as an effect of using mechanistic, static, narrow, and myopic  views focused on financial measurement and input control, which are still a  major cause of behavioral distortions, leading to unintended outcomes.   This conceptual framework prepares the field for the subsequent learning  sessions, during which students learn the DPM principles and methods and  apply them to cope with the potential problems associated with such  mechanistic views in performance management systems design, which are still  a recurring problem today.  As an outcome of the course, students will develop modeling skills that will  enhance advanced skills in designing and implementing “intelligent”  performance management systems in organizational contexts characterized by  dynamic complexity.   This is a preparatory course for the following courses:  -“Dynamic Performance Management for Public Sector Organizations”, and  -“Dynamic Performance Governance”
21177	DYNAMIC PERFORMANCE GOVERNANCE (in inglese)	BIANCHI	12	2° semestre	SECS-P/07	The course is aimed at providing students with the following main objectives: 1. Applying the Dynamic Performance Governance approach to Public Sector  organizations and Policy Networks. 2. Analysis of the complexity factors (i.e., "wicked problems") that particularly  influence and characterize planning, policy design and management in the  public sector and policy networks. 3. Designing and implementing Dynamic Performance Governance in complex  local/regional areas, public sectors, and communities. To this end, empirical applications of the Dynamic Performance Governance  approach to case-studies based on real public sectors, local/regional contexts,  policy networks and community issues.
21779	HUMAN NATURE IN ECONOMICS AND POLITICS (in inglese)	FIORITO	6	2° semestre	SECS-P/04	This course offers an advanced survey of current debates about the ontology,  methodology, and aims of the social sciences. Core readings will address  questions such as: 1) Should explanation in the social sciences follow the model of explanation in  the natural sciences, or are there peculiarities about human beings and social  phenomena that demand a different approach? 2) Is there a difference between explaining and understanding human behavior? Which should be the goal of the social sciences? 3) What are social structures, practices, norms, institutions, etc.? What is the  relationship between individuals and larger social structures? Do social  structures exist over and above individuals? 4) Should explanation in the social sciences rely only on facts about individuals  and their mental states? Or are there some cases in which social phenomena  cannot be explained in terms of individual behavior? 5) Is social science value-laden in a different way or to a different degree than  natural science? Is it possible or desirable to have a value-free social science? Is objectivity in social science possible? We will consider specific topics for discussion and additional readings  depending on the interests of the seminar participants. Additional case studies  will also be provided.

Insegnamenti secondo anno
Codice materia	Nome materia	Docente	CFU	Periodo	SSD	Obiettivi Formativi
13351	ALTRE CONOSCENZE UTILI PER L'INSERIMENTO NEL MONDO DEL LAVORO (in inglese)		3	1° semestre	
14184	TIROCINIO FORMATIVO E DI ORIENTAMENTO		9	1° semestre	
17939	MODELS AND TECHNIQUES FOR HUMAN RESOURCES ASSESSMENT AND DEVELOPMENT (in inglese)	CERESIA	9	1° semestre	M-PSI/06	The course aims at providing students with knowledge and understanding in the  area of Work and Organizational Psychology. It is specified that can not be taught the use of any knowledge and intervention  tools and technics  reserved to the profession of psychologist to any students  who don't have the degree in psychology, as the exercise of such tools is  protected by the law establishing such professional. The course will be mainly focused on the analysis of: (a) the psychological  determinants of decision-making and choice adopted by decision makers to  identify effective strategies and policies for ensuring that the basic needs of  employees are met; (b) the psychology of change management programs to  improve group, organizational and community learning and performance in  organizations. Students will learn the basic principles that inform the analysis and  understanding of human behavior that is concerned with various aspects of  people in the workplace, including employee productivity and well-being. From a  methodological perspective, the course will show how the System Dynamics  (SD) approach can highlight the cognitive biases underlining the poor strategic  decisions made by managers, focusing on their strong prior incorrect beliefs  about the relationship among the key variables of the considered social system  (phenomenon). Besides, the role of SD in facilitating the change management  processes will be analyzed and discussed, putting on evidence the effectiveness  of such methodology in fostering individual and organizational learning.  Both real-world applications and research will be emphasized throughout the  course. A Community-Based Learning (CBL) approach will be adopted.
19379	LABOUR LAW AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS IN THE PUBLIC SECTOR (in inglese)		6	1° semestre	IUS/07	Knowledge of the regulation of the employment relationship within the Italian  public sector and in the comparative context in times of crisis.
05917	PROVA FINALE		19	2° semestre	
17980	GLOBAL POLITICS (in inglese)	MONTELEONE	6	2° semestre	SPS/04	The course analyzes actors, processes, and institutions in contemporary  political systems that have potential effects on policy-setting contexts and that  affect policymaking and the effectiveness, stability, and predictability of political  institutions at the national, regional, international, and global levels. It also  analyzes the policy cycle of a selected number of policies. It allows students to  understand the relevance – and assess the soundness of tools used in public  policy decision-making. The course will specifically focus on health politics and  policies. The course will allow students to understand more complex concepts of  Political Science and advanced methods to analyze politics and policies.
	Attiv. form. a scelta dello studente		8		

