Anno Accademico 2023/2024
Laurea magistrale in INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS, POLITICS & TRADE (FULLY ONLINE)
Per maggiori informazioni vai su http://www.unipa.it/struttura.html?id=2023
---------
Classe di Laurea magistrale in Relazioni internazionali (LM-52)
Durata 2 anni
Sede PALERMO
Accesso libero
Dipartimento di Scienze Politiche e delle Relazioni Internazionali
Codice corso 2262
---------
Insegnamenti primo anno
Codice materia	Nome materia	Docente	CFU	Periodo	SSD	Obiettivi Formativi
15905	INTERNATIONAL TRADE LAW (in inglese)	CASABONA	12	1° semestre		
	INTERNATIONAL CONTRACT LAW (in inglese)	CASABONA	6		IUS/02
	WTO AND REGIONAL TRADE LAW (in inglese)	NEUWIRTH	6		IUS/13
18285	BUSINESS ENGLISH (in inglese)	GUARINO	6	1° semestre	L-LIN/12	Il corso di Business English mira a fornire agli studenti gli strumenti linguistici  necessari per comunicare, sia oralmente che in forma scritta, in ambienti di  lavoro internazionali. Gli studenti arricchiranno il loro vocabolario inglese con  termini ed espressioni specifiche che caratterizzano il Business English.
21252	INTERNATIONAL TRANSPORT LAW AND LOGISTICS (in inglese)	RIGAZIO	6	1° semestre	IUS/01	Students are able to understand and critically analyse the main systems of  transport law from the international legal point of view with the use the  appropriate technical legal terminology. The course focuses on the maritime,  rail, road, air and multimodal systems and students will be able to map and  analyse the different characteristics of these systems to the entire process of  transportation.
10546	WORKSHOP (in inglese)		3	2° semestre	
20765	GLOBAL POLITICS (in inglese)	MONTELEONE	9	2° semestre	SPS/04	The course focuses on the identification of political risks relevant to international  trade in contemporary global politics. It analyses actors, processes, and  institutions in the contemporary global political system that have potential effects  on policy setting contexts, and that affect policy-making and the effectiveness,  stability, and predictability of political institutions at the national, regional,  international, and global levels. It also analyses the policy cycle of a selected  number of policies and allows students to understand the relevance – and  assess the soundness - of tools used in public policy decision-making. The course will allow students to gain an understanding of more complex  concepts of Political Science and International Relations, and of advanced  methods to analyze phenomena of contemporary global politics.
21342	BUSINESS STRATEGY	COSENZ	6	2° semestre	SECS-P/07	Students are able to design and implement business strategies, as well as  evaluating the emerging organizational results in specific business contexts,  such as SMEs and Start-up firms. The course focuses on the organizational  attributes, conditions and variables of these specific organizations. Skills are  developed in designing shared viable strategies, and mapping organizational      processes affecting performance. Students also learn to use innovative strategy  design approaches (e.g., Business Modelling) for supporting business decision- making processes to identify areas for results improvement, and set proper  goals/objectives, as well as performance indicators to foster viable strategies.
21593	FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENTS AND GOLDEN POWERS (in inglese)	MOCAVINI	6	2° semestre	IUS/09	The course aims to describe the screening mechanisms of the foreign direct  investments adopted by the States and is divided in three parts. The first one is  an analysis of the development of legal globalization and international trade.  The second one focuses on the golden powers and screening mechanisms of  the investments in a comparative perspective. The last one is an analysis of the  major disputes on foreign direct investments and their supranational regulation.  Students are able to know the most important elements of the foreign direct  investments law in different legal systems and to solve disputes about foreign  direct investments in many jurisdictions.

Insegnamenti secondo anno
Codice materia	Nome materia	Docente	CFU	Periodo	SSD	Obiettivi Formativi
21591	INTERNATIONAL ECONOMICS AND ECONOMIC HISTORY (in inglese)	ASSO	12	1° semestre		Knowledge and understanding  Students must be able to understand the evolution of recent scenarios in international economic relations and international  business. Particular attention will be devoted to: economic growth and convergence; inequalities; financial markets; central  banks; global value chains and international competitiveness; eco-systems of innovative firms and social capital; the links  between globalization and international business, through trade integration and foreign direct investments.  The course will focus both on macroeconomic and microeconomic issues and target recent developments linked to the great  financial crisis and the Covid 19 pandemia. Specific attention will be devoted to the role of institutions in fostering economic  growth and innovations; the history of central banking and the development of new instruments of monetary policy; the  internationalizations of firms and family enterprises; the social responsibility of firms.    Making judgements  Students learn to assess crucial features of international economics under different perspectives. They gain a systemic view  of recent economic developments, adopting both an economic history and an international business approach. Students learn  how the economic performance of territories (regions, cities, clusters of firms) is related to cultural, historical and institutional  factors. Students are also actively involved in understanding international economic policy issues using conventional tools  and case studies.  Communication skills Students interact and discuss relevant literature sources on specific topics (e.g., case-studies) in the web-forum section of the  platform.  Learning skills  Students are enabled to acquire skills through self-assessment tests at the end of each video-lecture, as well as through e- tivities such as: web-forums on specific topics, FAQs, and a simulation of the final exam formed by a multiple choice questionnaire. The main objectives of this second part regard the study of basic principles, theories, events in the history of monetary and  real integration with specific attention to the global economy. The course will also provide the acquisition of specific  knowledge about the causes and effects of the contemporary economic growth, development and crisis in a long term and  comparative perspective. Specific attention will be devoted to the new institutional economics and to the analysis of inequalities in a global and regional  perspective. Part of the course is devoted to the history of central banking.
	GLOBAL  FIRMS AND POLICY ISSUES	CERMELLI	6		SECS-P/06
	GROWTH AND INEQUALITIES	ASSO	6		SECS-P/04
14368	SUPPLY CHAIN MANAGEMENT (in inglese)	BRUCCOLERI	9	2° semestre	ING-IND/35	This course discusses the vocabulary, key concepts and analytical tools  essential to understand operations in the production, distribution, and  procurement activities of companies. The main issues related to the strategic  and operational management of supply chains are discussed. The goal is to  show the student that well-designed supply chains can meet market demands at  minimum cost and maximum quality in a minimum amount of time. In addition, the course aims to offer a discussion of the theories that explain the  inter-organizational relationships of various kinds (supply relationships,  outsourcing, alliances, JVs, and M&A) and of the network strategies of  companies by combining the needs of theoretical rigor with practical applications  and analysis of real cases. In addition, the course aims to provide knowledge for  Open Innovation and crowdsourcing.
20658	FINAL THESIS (in inglese)		21	2° semestre	
20807	GLOBAL HISTORY (in inglese)	PATTI	6	2° semestre	M-STO/04	The course aims to provide the student with advanced knowledge and  understanding of Global History as a research field and of the debate in global  and world-historical studies, developing global and critical perspectives. At first,      the course will tackle some theoretical and methodological aspects concerning  these approaches to contemporary history, as well as some related approaches  such as world-system theories,  transnational history, micro-history, postcolonial  studies Students will reflect on how global history relates to global imperial and colonial  history; economic history; decolonization history;st-colonialism and, more  generally, to the critique of Eurocentrism.  Readings and discussions will focus on various conceptual approaches to global  and transnational history, and crucial subjects and processes. Attention will be  paid to the complex nexus between processes and the international context.
22629	AFRICAN HISTORY AND INSTITUTIONS	PUDDU	6	2° semestre	SPS/06	The programme is designed to offer an overview of Africa's history in the  nineteenth and twentieth century. The course will focus on some key aspects of  the political and economic history of the continent, with particular reference to  the entanglement between state building, economic accumulation and  international trade.  Students will be guided into some case studies that explore the patterns of  political violence in the borderlands of twentieth century Africa from a multi- scalar perspective. They will explore the agency and agenda of state and non- state actors operating at the international, regional, national, and local level as  well. Students will also learn the main rational of economic imperialism in nineteenth  and twentieth century Africa, exploring the relationship between European  governments, business groups, and different categories of African actors.
	Gruppo di attiv. form. opzionali		9		
	Attiv. form. a scelta dello studente (consigliate)		9		

Gruppo di attiv. form. opzionali
Codice materia	Nome materia	Docente	CFU	Periodo	SSD	Obiettivi Formativi
20651	COMPETION LAW & INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS	GARILLI	9	1° semestre	IUS/04	The course aims to provide advanced knowledge in the field of competition law and intellectual property rights. Furthermore, lessons will provide students with the ability to select instruments and methods in order to update and constantly improve learning skills, in particular by analyzing case law and law materials as well as referring to specialized literature in the legal field
21617	INTERNATIONAL CUSTOMS LAW & CORPORATE TAX (in inglese)	PERRONE	9	1° semestre	IUS/12

Attiv. form. a scelta dello studente (consigliate)
Codice materia	Nome materia	Docente	CFU	Periodo	SSD	Obiettivi Formativi
21647	COMPETION LAW AND INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS (in inglese)	GARILLI	9	1° semestre	IUS/04	The course aims to provide advanced knowledge in the field of competition law and intellectual property rights. Furthermore, lessons will provide students with the ability to select instruments and methods in order to update and constantly improve learning skills, in particular by analyzing case law and law materials as well as referring to specialized literature in the legal field
21648	INTERNATIONAL CUSTOMS LAW AND CORPORATE TAX	PERRONE	9	1° semestre	IUS/12	Educational objective is to achieve an adequate degree of knowledge of income  corporate taxation, customs law and customs regimes, in order to be able to  enter the working context of companies operating in international markets

