Il corso di DYNAMIC PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT (in inglese) del corso di Laurea magistrale in SCIENZE DELLE AMMINISTRAZIONI E DELLE ORGANIZZAZIONI COMPLESSE del curriculum PUBLIC MANAGEMENT, ha i seguenti obiettivi formativi: 
Dynamic Performance Management (DPM) is a conceptual framework adopting  a feedback view to frame dynamic complexity and deal with it, so to enhance  policy design and implementation, leading to sustainable outcomes.   Through facilitated modeling, DPM fosters performance dialogue,  communication and learning in both organizational and inter-organizational  settings (e.g.: city neighborhoods). This enables a major shift from performance  measurement to performance management, which enhances the use of  performance information by the involved stakeholders.   By adopting a causal and outcome-oriented view of performance, DPM supports  stakeholders to broaden the investigated system boundaries for policy analysis.  This also enhances trade-off analysis in both time (about the effects of policies  in the short vs. long term) and space (about the effects of policies on a  subsystem vs. another subsystem).  Through DPM, performance drivers and related strategic resources are  modeled, to enable selective and prompt detection of “weak signals” of change,  affecting performance outputs and outcomes in the long run. This also supports  policy makers to design and implement policies to counteract the causes behind  the detected adverse “weak signals”, so to foster sustainable performance.   DPM adopts a balanced view of performance measures, not only embodying the  financial, but also the competitive and social dimension of the end-results.  DPM challenges traditional performance analysis, based on a static, sectoral,  and financial oriented view. It also fosters an interdisciplinary view of  management. Not only the linkages between different business functions (e.g.:  organization, strategy, human resource, finance, customer relationships) are  captured by DPM, but also the perspectives provided by other disciplines (e.g.:  psychology, sociology, law, and political science) are embodied in framing  performance.    Based on case-study analysis, by attending this course students will learn how  to develop conceptual and insight computer simulation models rooted on a DPM  approach.     The course starts with six sessions aimed at introducing DPM in the broad  performance management domain. To this end, students are asked to analyze a  set of papers and discuss them over the sessions through different slots of  debating points. This helps them to frame main evolution patterns that the  performance management discipline and practice have been portraying in the  last six decades. They will perceive how the changing and growing level of  dynamic complexity of the contexts where (public, private, profit, non-profit)  organizations operate has been a primary factor requiring major innovations in  performance management systems design, leading to corresponding shifts of  focus in the discipline. Students will also experience how each evolutionary  stage in the field has embodied the logics of the prior stages. They will also  discover how major issues which are today considered as new trends in  performance management systems design were addressed by researchers  since the ‘70s as potential factors of failure, or “pseudo” control. They will reflect  on how, since then, major risks of performance management systems failure  were reported as an effect of using mechanistic, static, narrow, and myopic  views focused on financial measurement and input control, which are still a  major cause of behavioral distortions, leading to unintended outcomes.   This conceptual framework prepares the field for the subsequent learning  sessions, during which students learn the DPM principles and methods and  apply them to cope with the potential problems associated with such  mechanistic views in performance management systems design, which are still  a recurring problem today.  As an outcome of the course, students will develop modeling skills that will  enhance advanced skills in designing and implementing “intelligent”  performance management systems in organizational contexts characterized by  dynamic complexity.   This is a preparatory course for the following courses:  -“Dynamic Performance Management for Public Sector Organizations”, and  -“Dynamic Performance Governance”